All happy families are similar to each other; every unhappy family is unhappy in their own way. -

There was general confusion in the house of Oblonskiy. The lady of the house had learned that her husband had a relationship with the French governess who had been in the house, and told him that she could no longer stay with him under a roof. This situation has lasted for three days and was felt by both the spouses themselves, no, by all family members and the staff in the most embarrassing way. They all felt that there was no higher thought in their life together, that the people who met at each post office by chance were even closer to each other than they, the members of the family itself, and the servants of the family born and raised in the house Oblonskiy.

The mistress of the house did not leave her quarters, the lord had been absent for three days. The children ran around in the house like orphans, the Englishwoman scolded the housekeeper and wrote to a friend who wanted to give her a new job. The cook had left the house at noon since yesterday and had the cook and the coachman submitted their bills.

On the third day after the scene, Prince Stefan Arkadyevich Oblonskiy - Stiwa's name in the world - awoke at the usual hour, that is, at eight o'clock in the morning, not in his wife's bedroom, but in his cabinet on Saffiandiwan. He turned his full, effeminate body on the springs of the divan, as though he wished to continue sleeping, while on the other side [4] he intimately embraced a pillow and pressed it to his cheek. Suddenly he jumped up and sat up, opening his eyes.

"Yes, yes, how was that?" He mused, brooding over his dream. "How was that? Right; Alabin gave a dinner in Darmstadt; No, not in Darmstadt, there was something American about it. This Darmstadt was in America, yes, and Alabin gave the food on glass tables, yes, and the tables sang: ' Il mio tesoro ' - or not so, it was something better, and certain small carafes, looking like women's rooms, " -; he remembered.

Stefan Arkadyevitch's eyes flashed brightly, he thought and smiled. "Yes, it was pretty, very pretty. There was a lot of excellence in what you could not describe in words and in thoughts do not express. "He noticed a strip of light that had stolen from the side through the cotton stores and jumped funny with his feet from the sofa to them with the to look for his wife's gold and saffron-embroidered slippers, which he revered for his birthday last year; while, following an old nine-year-old habit, he went by hand without standing up to the spot where his dressing-gown used to hang in the bedroom.

Only then did he come to his senses; he suddenly remembered how it was that he did not sleep in his wife's bedroom, but in the cabinet; the smile disappeared from his face and he frowned.

"Oh, oh, oh, alas," he broke out, remembering everything that had happened. All the details of his appearance with his wife reappeared in his mind, and he was burdened by all the awkwardness of his situation and, most painfully, his own guilt.

"Yes, she will not forgive, she can not forgive, and the most terrible thing is that the blame for everything lies only with myself - I am to blame - but not guilty! And here lies all the drama, "he thought," alas, alas! "He spoke in despair, recalling all the deep impressions he received in that scene.

It was unerquicklichsten been those first minutes, as he, serene and satisfied from the theater returning home, a [5] enormous pear for his wife in hand, they neither found in the cabinet in the salon, and she finally encountered in the bedroom, those unfortunate letter that discovered everything, in the hands. She, whom he considered the eternally caring, ever-struggling, omnipresent dolly, was now motionless, holding the letter in her hand, with the expression of horror, despair, and rage.

"What's that?" She asked him, pointing to the letter, and in the memory of this he was tormented, as is often the case, not both the incident itself and the way he responded to those words.

He was at that moment, as most people are, when they are unexpectedly convicted of an ignominious offense. He did not understand how to adapt his face to the situation in which he had come after the discovery of his guilt, and instead of playing the injured man, defending himself, justifying himself and asking for forgiveness, or at least remaining equanimous-all this was yet to come Being better than what he really did, his expression ("Brain reflexes," thought Stefan Arkadyevitch, as a lover of physiology) involuntarily and suddenly turned to his usual, good-humored and therefore rather simple-minded smile.

He could not forgive himself for that stupid smile. When Dolly had watched, she shuddered as if from a physical pain, then indulged in her own passion in a stream of bitter words, and she left the room. From that time on she did not want to see her husband anymore.

"It's all due to the stupid smile," thought Stefan Arkadyevich. "But what shall I do, what shall I do?" He asked in despair, without finding an answer.